---
title: 'What is a left-wing party?'
date: 2024-09-04T14:20:09-04:00
---

I’ve been reading some posts by David Moscrop, who I greatly admire, as well as Edward Row, who I also really like, discussing who exactly is left and right in Canadian electoral politics.

David argues that the Liberal Party of Canada can’t be meaningfully seen as left-wing, with his examples forcing railroad workers to arbitration and demanding public servants go back to work. Edward argued that the NDP can’t be seen as a left-wing or socialist party, because in 2013 they removed the word socialism from their constitution. Arguments like these often end up stating that the NPD are a centre-left party, and the liberals are centre or centre-right, with the tories occupying the centre-right to far-right, and that Canada doesn’t have a left-wing party.

Both posters make valid arguments, and they make them thoughtfully. But they both raise a huge question for me, one that I ask myself every time I bellyache about politics with my friends and family, or attend local riding meetings.

What is a left wing party? What does it mean to be left wing?

The origin of left and right wing comes from the French revolution, when the commoners in the French parliament sat on the left and the aristocrats sat on the right. The idea is that these representatives would vote in their own class interests, and “left-wing” carried through time and place to mean whig, liberal, populist, socialist, progressive, social democratic, labour, green, communist, and other parties, while “right-wing” would represent monarchist, conservative, reactionary, fascist, nationalist, and other political typologies. The idea of centrism comes only a little later, with some progressive aristocrats or moderate commoners (often, it is to be said, richer commoners) trying to broker between sides or serve their own interests.

The idea that these distinctions exist through time is a little ludicrous - while some members of the NDP may have read and enjoyed Rousseau and Thomas Paine and other “left-wing” thinkers of the 18th century, one would struggle to meaningfully link the British Labour party with the Whigs or the Dutch Green-Left with the American Populist Party. People simply don’t care about corn laws or silver coinage in the way they used to. Modern political considerations - climate change, LGBTQ rights, abortion, gun control, whatever, they don’t map cleanly onto old political parties. Imagine Medicare for All in a world where doctors still talk about bloodletting and balancing of humours. The defence is that it’s a useful shorthand or heuristic, and if you say left or right-wing, people know what you mean.

But do they? Really, do they?

Looking at the two examples, David’s argument is that left-wing parties are defined by their actions. The Liberal Party of Canada are in government (supported officially, until recently, by the NDP), and they are openly taking actions that are anti-union and anti-worker. Unions and the working class are the constituent parts of the left, and by openly attacking those constituents, a party can’t meaningfully call itself left-wing.

That argument is mostly solid, and I’d be lying if I said that David explicitly stated “this is my argument and it’s ironclad”. It’s a post, it’s not a doctoral thesis. (His book, [Too Dumb for Democracy](https://gooselane.com/products/too-dumb-for-democracy), I believe was his thesis, and it’s good.) But a results based typology of leftism would crumble if applied over time. Does a left-wing political party need to cater to every request of a union in every situation? And if they fail to do so, due to budgetary pressures or electoral concerns or something else, do they lose their status as a left-wing party for eternity? Listening to workers is clearly an important litmus test for a party that claims to represent the working class, but if it’s applied broadly, I’m not sure there has never been a working class party in power. The Russian Social Democratic Workers Party clearly betrayed the working class many times. NDP Toronto Mayor David Miller was tarred as an out of control leftist, but he was hard on public sector workers during the 2009 garbage strike. Various Nordic Social Democratic parties have issued wage restraint during recessions. At some point, even in putatively socialist countries (what that word means is very contentious), political parties engage in brokerage, issue prioritization, and strategic thinking, some of which will inevitably run afoul of priorities from some unions or working class groups.

Edward’s argument, insofar as I remember it, was about stated ideology. He brought up that Mulcair led a charge to remove the word “socialist” from the NDP’s constitution in 2013, and a party that does that certainly can’t be thought of as socialist, and publicly abandoning one of the major left-wing currents of thought means you’re probably not a left-wing party.

This argument also has really strong backing. Mulcair inherited a party that had been moderating since the signing of the Regina manifesto - first from the Winnipeg declaration and the merging with CLC and the fight against Hazen Argue’s more right-wing faction, then kicking out Waffle members in the 70s, to some centrist NDP provincial governments in the 90s and 00s. And Mulcair’s platform to remove socialist from the party constitution rhymed with Tony Blair’s removal of article IV from the UK Labour constitution, which was a signal of moving the party rightward. There are similar public statements in the US with the creation of the Democratic Leadership Council, or the incredibly confusing political currents in Eurocommunism, in which left-wing parties rebuked the Soviet Union and renounced some of their previous beliefs.

But trying to say that party statements matter that much is, again, not a durable concept. Once again, I’m not attacking Edward here - he’s a smart guy, and I’m trying to tease an understanding from a post where he was (rightly) saying that fascism and communism are different political currents. But I ask myself, were the NDP a socialist party up to the moment where Mulcair removed the word socialist from the constitution? Of course not. While some leaders like Jack Layton called themselves socialist, Jack also publicly called himself a moderate, talked about balanced budgets, and tried to get the party to focus on small, kitchen table issues rather than the workers controlling the means of production.

And that argument also raises questions about language. Language politics are incredibly annoying, because people who believe the same or similar things will argue over semantics. This gets raised all the time in international politics, where the American word “liberal” and the European word “liberal” mean very different things - the American word refers to left-wingers who support a large government and welfare state, the European word refers to right-wingers who support small government, private property, and markets. And then there’s the Canadian Liberals, who refer to a political party that supports both of those things and neither of those things, depending on which way the wind is blowing.

But there’s also weird language about socialism and commitment to leftism because, well, some countries just never used the word socialist that often. Marx used the word socialist and communist interchangeably, and it wasn’t until later left wing thinkers that “socialism” became associated with an interim stage before “communism” was defined as the final stage, the classless society. But a lot of parties that were putatively Marxist called themselves “social democratic” parties - that’s really a linguistic difference between Slavic/Germanic languages and romantic languages. A purely linguistic typology gets confused, when the Swedish social democrats were, for most of their history, to the left of the French Socialists. And don’t forget, the communists in Russia? They were social democrats. So Mulcair removing the word socialist and committing the NDP to social democracy, if you want to be funny, could be said to be in the tradition of Vladimir Lenin.

Ultimately, what is a left-wing party? I think it’s about public perception. Vibes, if I’m flippant. The NDP are Canada’s left-wing party because the Canadian public views them as left-wing. The Liberals are the centre, the conservatives are the right. How close or far these parties are to one another shifts and changes over time, and sometimes they may totally flip - like Ontario in the 70s, where the PCs were seen as left of the Liberals, or federally in 2015, when the NDP were seen as right of the Liberals. But in a democracy, I don’t think it’s useful or possible to define left, centre, and right entirely through actions taken when in power, or through statements made in elections and public documents. Those two things are indicative, and influence public perception, but ultimately the voters decide.  

Voters are fickle, political discourse is dominated by media conglomerates, and polities change as a result. Political parties may cynically chase votes, attempt to change their public perception, even abandon voting groups, but for the most part they try and maximize their vote share, and thus, most of a given polity is served in a given election. The parties are what the people say there are.

Now, to be clear about two things:

1) There are absolutely voters who are ignored, and there are political systems that ensure better representation of the full polity, like proportional representation. But if Canada had proportional representation starting today, there wouldn’t be a party to the left of the NDP that got 30% or even 10% of the vote. Left-wing Canadians vote for the NDP, because we understand them as the most left-wing party, and when there’s a leadership election, we try and get the left-wing Candidate to win. I know, I tried to get Niki Ashton to win in 2017, and she didn’t. Those of us who are left-wing either come back to the fold, like I shamefully do every time, or abandon electoral politics or vote communist. But considering how many people vote for the communist party, it doesn’t seem like there are that many Canadians who consider the NDP insufficiently left wing.

2) That doesn’t mean the NDP are as good at winning elections as they could be, or that they’re a good party! Maybe there are some additional votes to be gotten by calling themselves socialist again, as Canadians have fairly positive feelings about the word socialism. Maybe NDP mayors and premiers being insufficiently anti-worker hurts them. But Jagmeet ran pretty far to the left of Mulcair or Layton in his rhetoric in 2019, and got the lowest share of the popular vote for the NDP since 2004 for his efforts (Singh’s 2021 run just edged out Layton’s 2006 run). Ed Broadbent had a couple really good runs, and polled in first place for a little while while calling himself a socialist. But he also kicked out the Waffle members, who were clearly to his left. So left wing and the NDP, it’s a moving target, as it is with every political party.

What does it mean to be left-wing? In Canada, it probably means you identify as a socialist, and if you do that, you probably vote for the NDP. But hell, maybe you vote Liberal! There are lots of Liberals who call themselves socialists, and the fact that the NDP have never formed federal government - only parties who call themselves liberal or conservative have - means many Canadians see the Liberals as the country’s left-wing party of government. And that view isn’t entirely wrong. Tony Benn of UK Labour used to say “Labour is not a socialist party, but there are socialists in it”, and there are socialists and social-democrats in the Liberal Party of Canada. One of them is currently the environment minister, at least as far as he self identifies. If you’re really left-wing, you probably still vote for the NDP, but you dislike them a lot of the time. You might miss Jack Layton a lot, who ran to the right of the current NDP leader, but at least one time he got a ton of votes from Quebec.

All this ties into a great question - is it electorally beneficial to be left wing? Is the Canadian public aching for a “real” left wing party? That’s a point that gets raised a lot during electoral political discussions, and I think I’ll write about that next.
